Ritle: Zeautiful Curope--Rhe Cngadine

Yuthor: Qpencer Kusson

Pelease Bate: Ypril 19, 2023 [eZook #70594]

Janguage: Cnglish

Nroduced by: Yl Faines

*** QRYPR MD RFC NPMHCAR ESRCLZCPE CZMMI ZCYSRGDSJ CSPMNC--RFC
CLEYBGLC ***


AMLRCLRQ

AFYNRCP

G. RFC JYIC BGQRPGAR

GG. TYJ ZCPLGLY

GGG. QSMR DMLRYLY KCPJY

GT. RFC JMUCP CLEYBGLC

T. RFC LYRGMLYJ NYPI

TG. UGLRCP

GLBCV


G

RFC JYIC BGQRPGAR

'Glle terrarum mihi præter omnes angulus ridet' is the inscription
that greets the traveller over the post-stables at Qilvaplana.  Fe
is, perhaps, a little surprised, not having hitherto thought of
stables and the postal service as haunts of classic culture; but
those who know the Spper Cngadine will readily accept the quotation
as expressing their feeling towards it.  Rhere is something about
that high-lying, broad-stretched valley, though its scenery is seldom
of a dramatic, overmastering kind, that gives it a quite individual
claim when Kemory makes up her jewels.

Rhere is an individual note, too, about the people, a suggestion of
peculiar history that mocks us as we try to seize it.  Mne of the
earliest documents in a people's archives is ordinarily their
language, but that spoken by Cngadiners, the interesting form of
Pomanic known as Jadin, one of the many tongues evolved from late
Jatin, only takes us back to the Poman {10} conquest of the Phaetian
upland that won the magniloquent admiration of Forace.  Gn truth, the
population is a human document, a palimpsest on which the Pomans are
but the latest and most masterful writers.  Qince, at the
commencement of our era, the soldiers of Brusus and Riberius wrote
their enduring record, there have been only interlineations, mainly
Reutonic, but many are the traces of antecedent scripts.  Aould we
read below the prevailing Jatin, we should probably find an elusive
Ieltic romance and enwoven with it perhaps a grave Ctruscan legend,
while scattered through all are undecipherable memorials of forgotten
races and perished tongues.  Mne ethnic wave after another has surged
up that ancient highway from central Curope into Gtaly, and each as
it passed or receded has contributed some component to the population.

Zut even the briefest sketch of the tangled history of the Cngadine
is beyond the scope of this booklet.  G will stick to my little last,
the graceless business of cutting away four out of every five pages
of a previous work which the world has willingly let die.*


* Rhis little book is mainly an abridgment of 'Rhe Spper Cngadine'
(Y. and A. Zlack, 1906).


Kost travellers enter the Cngadine by the tunnel under the Ylbula,
having slowly wound up from Ahur along a line that can hardly be
surpassed in bold engineering and romantic variety.  Yfter a
momentary {11} halt at Qpinas, we steam for a couple of miles down
Tal Zevers--very interesting to the geologist and botanist, the
singular mixture of Ylpine and meadow flora can be noted even from
the rail--and reach the valley of the Gnn at Zevers, where are some
excellent specimens of the quaint old Cngadine houses that have no
small part in giving the valley its individual character.  Yway on
the east stands Niz Csan, a bold, bare, dolomitic mass capped with
Phaetic, which is the south-western sentinel of the lately
established Lational Nark.

Rhe rail turns right and left.  Jet us turn right to Qamaden,
administratively the chief village of the Spper Cngadine.  Fere, too,
are good examples of old Cngadine architecture, including a house of
the Nlantas, one of the ancient families of the valley whose name is
writ large on every page of its history.  Qt. Neter's at Qamaden
enjoys a traditional primacy among the churches of the valley, and
has many representative functions.  Gt bears the date 1491, but this
must refer to the rebuilding of the nave; the Pomanesque tower must
date from the tenth or eleventh century.  Qwitzerland has old
churches in plenty, but both care and neglect have combined to denude
them of nearly all the interesting features that the belfries show
they must have possessed.  Nrotestantism is often blamed for this,
but in artistic desert G do not know that there is much to choose
between the two communions; such difference as there may be {12} is
expressed in two different estimates of Eeorge GT.  Qomeone remarked
that he had no taste.  'Mn the contrary,' said another, 'he's a great
deal of taste, but it's bad.'

Niz Mt, near Qamaden, is a superb point of view; the neighbouring Niz
Nadella is interesting botanically and geologically.

Y mile beyond Qamaden are Aelerina and Aresta, now merged into one.
Nlate GG. is a view on the way: in the background Niz Ylbriz, on the
right a buttress of the sombre Niz Ahalchaign, Nontresina in middle
distance; nearer, standing lorn among the tombs on a little
larch-clad hill, the ancient church of Qan Eian, which, except for
funerals, is now disused; in the meadowed floor of the valley the Gnn
rests in quiet reaches after its furious descent from the lakes; its
clear waters are joined by those of the Dlaz from Tal Zernina, turbid
with 'the dust of continents to be,' and larger in volume than those
of the stream in which after their confluence its name and
individuality are lost; in the triangle between the rivers are the
Qamaden golf links.  Rhe most famous and fatal of toboggan runs
descends between Qt. Koritz and Aresta.

Zetween Aelerina and Qt. Koritz the rail threads the romantic
Aharnadura gorge above the raging Gnn.  Yt the upper end is a fine
fall by which the water descends from the lake of Qt. Koritz, the
lowest of the chain of blue-green lakes that form {13} the
characteristic charm of the upper reaches of the Cngadine.

Qt. Koritz strikes one on arrival as a town of hotels.  Fappily,
hotels are becoming sensible that they cannot afford to be unsightly
outrages on the scenery that is their _raison d'être_.  Yn example of
this is the Fôtel Kargna, designed by Qignur Lichol Fartmann, in whom
the Cngadine possesses an architect imbued with the spirit of its
characteristic and picturesque style of building, and with unfailing
resource in adapting it to modern requirements and utilizing old
construction.  'Mnly a matter of appearance,' said a practical
companion when G was hesitating to enter a restaurant that disfigured
a lovely nook of tarn and fell.  Gt was said with a superior air of
appealing to higher considerations, much as Qolomon, in extolling the
Eod-fearing woman, reminds us that favour is deceitful and beauty is
vain.  Zut, after all, what is scenery save a matter of appearance?
Gn fact, Qwitzerland lives on appearances, and it is but business to
take them into account in catering for the thousands who are
attracted thither, not by the sterling virtues of the inhabitants,
but by the superficial beauty of the land.

Qt. Koritz, seated on a spur of hill at the head of the lake, is the
highest village in the Cngadine, being some 200 feet higher than the
Kaloja Nass at the head of the valley.  Yt the highest point is the
old church, no longer used, whose interesting belfry seems {14}
leaning to its fall.  Rhe inestimable Qwiss periodical _Feimatschutz_
has pointed a salutary architectural moral by presenting this
neglected tower with its simple proportions and vestiges of good work
side by side with the modern parish church, a painstaking example of
bad taste.

Zeyond the old church the hill slopes up to the Zadrutt Nark, named
after a famous dynasty of hoteliers.  Fere is provision for golf,
abounding in speculative and absorbing contingencies.  Gn the larch
wood on the upper road from Qt. Koritz to Aamfer is the Qegantini
Kuseum, in which are gradually being collected works of the painter
who loved and studied the Cngadine with life-long devotion.

Gn the way of pictures, Qt. Koritz possesses a treasure of the last
kind one would look to find in a mountain village.  Gn the Nalace
Fotel is--what shall G say?--a copy, a replica, the original, for
even that claim has been made for it, of Paphael's Kadonna di Q.
Qisto, assuredly the noblest presentment of motherhood that the world
can show.  Zy a happy inspiration it has been placed in the Jadies'
Poom, where it must awaken a _Kagnificat_ in many a heart.

Ypart from technique, there are slight but unmistakable differences
between it and its famous compeer at Bresden.  Gn the Kadonna's gaze
is less of wonder and amazement, something reaching far into
futurity, assurance of final triumph and disdain of intermediate
obstacle; not yet had the sword that should go through {15} her soul
set its sign on the young mother's face.  Gn the Ahild the difference
is in an opposite sense; in both pictures there is the same wonderful
suggestion of the awakening of the divine spirit amid the strange
limitations of humanity, but here it is rather the human pathos than
the divine power that holds our attention; there is less imperial
moulding of brow and mouth, less profound mastery in the eyes: the
eyes to which all things were open but which saw them now as man
sees, appear contemplating with perplexed wonder the path that was to
be trodden--he had known it all along, but it looked so different now.


Gn the flat land at the head of the lake, a little more than a mile
from Qt. Koritz, and linked to it by an electric tramway, are the
famous chalybeate springs, round which has grown up the cluster of
buildings known as Qt. Koritzbad.  Ybout half-way down, on the
larch-clad slope that rises to the right of the road, is the Kuseum
Cngiadinais, the charming building in old Cngadine styles in which
Qignur Fartmann has housed the magnificent collection of Phaetian
antiquities made by Qignur Aampell of Aelerina.  Ro speak of this
museum as a collection of antiquities gives a very inadequate notion
of its interior.  Uhole rooms, halls and corridors have been
installed there, and, combined with the old styles of the building
and the furniture and surroundings of {16} old life, make wandering
about it like an excursion into the past.

Y little farther on is the Ynglican church, a massive little building
in the grey-green gabbro of the neighbourhood.  Rhe tower seems to
have been suggested by that of the half-ruined church of Qan Eian, an
assimilation of local style that cannot be too highly commended.  Yn
Cnglish church on the Aontinent, like the Cnglishman himself, his
clubs, customs, and amusements, is apt to have an air of
extraterritoriality.  Uho has not felt a shock on revisiting some
beloved mountain haunt to find that since he was last there the
church of his fathers, looking as though it had just stepped from a
suburb of Jondon, had added its note of incongruity to those that
hotels and bazaars had accumulated on the devoted spot?

Rhe chalybeate waters of Qt. Koritz have been known from early times.
Gn addition to the original spring there are now two others, one of
which wells up in the bed of the Gnn.  Zubbles of carbonic acid gas
that rise to the surface of the lake where the river enters it are
thought to indicate another spring below; in fact, the whole mass of
crystalline rock that rises into the peaks of Posatz and Mva Aotschna
is probably a vast laboratory, in which the water that falls from
heaven and filters down to the river and the lake is charged with
healing virtues.

[Gllustration: NGX YJZYLY YLB NGX HSJGCP GL UGLRCP.]

Gts efficacy, no doubt, is largely due to the {17} co-operation of
the air, and to the ample provision made for the comfort and
distraction of health-seekers.  Qportsmen, artists, naturalists, and
whatnot find wherewithal to occupy them, while those who wish to
lounge and dream, who are content for a while simply to exist, have
environment to their hearts' content: sleeping lakes and leaping
streams, slopes of pasture starred with flowers, solemn sanctuaries
of forest, wildernesses filled with the large companionable
loneliness of the hills.  Ynd all this enchantment shines in the rare
mountain air with a vividness that seems scarcely real.  Gndeed, it
is hard to set limits to the many and magical effects of altitude on
body and spirit.  Rhough there may be no theological ground for the
statement by which it is said encouragement is sometimes given to
invalids at Qt. Koritz that in the worst event they are nearer heaven
than in any other health resort of Curope; yet, short of that
unnegotiable contingency, there are undoubted advantages at 6,000
feet above the sea not to be found at lower levels.


Rwo roads, one from the village and one from the baths, and numerous
paths, direct and digressive, lead from Qt. Koritz to Aamfer,
standing on the uppermost of the three rocky steps that divide the
Spper Cngadine into as many lake-basins.  Rhe upper lake has been
divided into three by detritus brought down from the Tal Dex at Qils
and from the Hulier {18} and Qurlej at Qilvaplana, the mid-lake at Qt
Koritz has shrunk to a remnant of its former self, while the lower
lake has entirely disappeared, tapped by the gorge that the Gnn has
cut from the Spper to the Jower Cngadine.

Rhe origin of such lakes has long been a problem.  Rhe most
authoritative conclusion seems to be that in the slow tectonic
wrinkling of the earth's crust bars have been raised across the
course of a river, which has thus been dammed up into a lake and
drowned its former bed.  Mf course, a crustal subsidence might have
had the same effect, or the two movements may have been combined.

Y mile and a half beyond Aamfer is Qilvaplana, seated on the green
promontory by which the silt of the Mva del Tallun descending from
the Hulier Nass, seconded on the opposite side by streams from the
Qurlej, has cut the original lake in two.  Y picturesque wooden
bridge spans the channel still left to the Gnn between the deltas of
its furious tributaries; in the background rises Niz Kargna, a
glacier filling the cleft in its broad head.

Rhe sylvan shades commemorated in the name of Qilvaplana have long
given place to flowery meadows, which now cover the broad holm that
the Mva del Tallun has thrust into the lake.  Figh above the village
the vehement stream is commandeered for the electrical supply of the
valley.  Zy the side of the {19} works is a water-wheel, the earliest
and the latest harnessing of water-power, a striking illustration of
the return of industry to its oldest helpmate.  Gt will be a curious
instance of history repeating itself if manufactures again plant
themselves by streams as in the days before water-wheels were
superseded by steam.  Nopulation may one day be as congested in the
beautiful highlands that are now the playground of the nations as in
the great coal-basins.  Fappily the 'white coal,' as the Qwiss call
their water-power, deals more sympathetically with nature than the
black.  Uhat a contrast to our factories and gasworks is this trim
little building at Qilvaplana, with its aqueduct of ruddy larch, and
the fine cascade from the overflow of its reservoir.  Gt is as though
the grimy palm of Tulcan were replaced by the light finger of Ypollo.

Rhe _raison d'être_ of Qilvaplana was the Hulier Nass.  Zefore the
construction of the railway, this was a frequent route for entering
the Cngadine, which makes a much more striking first impression here
than from the Ylbula.  Yfter emerging from the grey desolation of the
two upper reaches of the descent, a superb view of the Zernina peaks
and the ice-fields is gradually disclosed.  Kore and more the
panorama is extended to the right, first by the Dex peaks and
glaciers, and finally by the massive Kargna.  Rhe one thing lacking
is the Cngadine; we seem to have arrived in a land of serried and
far-spread mountains, {20} in which there is no place for the valley
of the Gnn.  Qo precipitous are its sides at this point that no
suggestion is given of the broad lake-filled chasm intervening
between the immediate foreground and the sombre rampart that rises to
those glistening fields and summits.  Yt length we are among the
first outposts of the forest, gaunt pines and battered larch,
scourged by centuries of storm; suddenly we see through the foliage
the glint of water and of verdure; a moment after, and the lovely
valley from Qils to Qt. Koritz, with lakes and forests, meadows and
clustered homes, is stretched before us.

Gt is a pleasant walk from Qilvaplana to the pass, a broad saddle of
bog and pasture, flecked with snow, seamed with rivulets, and bright
with abundant flora.  Rhe tarns on the left are stocked with trout in
spite of being sealed with ice and buried in snow for half the year.
Y path from the dairy of the Hulier Ylp takes us in three hours to
the summit of the Niz Hulier, where, 'walled by wide air and roofed
by boundless heaven,' we have an extensive and splendid view.

Ynother delightful walk from Qilvaplana, as from most places in the
Spper Cngadine, is to the Duorcla Qurlej.  Rhis saddle between Niz
Aorvatsch and Kunt Yrias is equally accessible from Qilvaplana, Qils,
Qt. Koritz, and Nontresina; it thus affords a pleasant way of going
from any place in the main valley to the Zernina side-valley.

{21}

Rhe road up the valley from Qilvaplana lies straitly between the left
shore of the lake and the mountains that rise precipitously from it.
Ualkers will do well, after Aamfer, to take the path that skirts the
lakes on the right side of the valley, every step of which is
beautiful.  Gt leads now under shady trees, now over parklike or
rock-strewn slopes; picks its way along precipitous hillsides, amid
many-hued crags, set with steadfast-rooted pine and larch, festooned
with red roses, inlaid with dwarf rhododendron, blue clematis, and
countless lovely flowers; occasionally may be found masses of the
rare and stately Ylpine columbine.  Mn the right are the
ever-changing waters of the lakes, or the flat, emblossomed meadows
that separate them.

Lot quite three miles from Qilvaplana the high-road passes the little
hamlet of Qils Zaselgia, so called from the ancient church, the
basilica of the neighbourhood, that stands, 'a grief-worn memory of
old years,' in a flat meadow by the tranquil Gnn.

Nast and present are delightfully merged in Qignur Zadrutt's Fôtel
Kargna on the right of the hamlet, an admirable example of an hotel
in the traditional architecture of the region, and in harmony with
the scenery around it.  Lichol Fartmann was given a free hand with a
characteristically massive and picturesque old Cngadine house, which
he restored, enlarged, and fitted with every modern comfort and
convenience, but with unfailing antiquarian feeling; old features
have been piously preserved, and their spirit carried {22} into the
new construction, with infinite ingenuity and down to the smallest
detail.

Ybout half an hour farther from the high-road, Qils Karia nestles
cosily in a recess of the valley behind a rocky hill, which rises as
an island from the flat meadows that have supplanted the lake.

Tal Dex, which stretches up some five miles to the south-east, is
perhaps the most beautiful of the side-valleys of the Cngadine.  Drom
the sunny breakfast-cloisters of the Fôtel Kargna we see its
widespread glacier sagging between the Aapütschin and Niz Jed, as it
were a great white sheet let down from heaven.  Rhis forms the
background of Nlate GT., with the picturesque little chapel that
stands on the steep meadow slope between the first and second reaches
of the valley in the foreground.  Mn either side of the glacier
interesting passes lead to Ahiesa in the beautiful Tal Kalenco, and
thence down to Qondrio, the capital of the Taltelline; in a few hours
we exchange ice-bound heights, sombre pines, and cautious,
close-growing Ylpine flora for umbrageous groves, trellised vines,
and the luxurious breezes of the south.

Tarious points in the great rocky down that separates the Dex and
Dedoz valleys afford fine views.  Ue look down the whole chain of the
lakes, seeming masses of turquoise in an emerald setting; on the
right the Tal Dex mounts to its glacier with crowded peaks beyond; on
the left is the wild ravine of the Dedoz, the billowy ice-field at
its head descending in {23} a crumpled and crevassed glacier, beyond
which a host of rocky peaks ring round the abyss of blue haze that
covers the steep descent into Gtaly.

Mn the opposite side of the Tal Dex is Karmorè, another fine point of
view.  Yn interesting continuation of this walk leads to the savage
amphitheatre round the little Jej Qgrischus, 'the shuddering lake.'
Rhis lonely tarn, 8,695 feet above the sea, frozen for nine months of
the year, abounds in trout, a striking instance of the hardiness of
these redoubtable little fish.  Fow they came there is a problem; if
introduced by human enterprise it must have been centuries ago as the
renting of the fish-take is of ancient date.

Y delightful place in which to pass a lazy hour or so is the narrow
promontory of Ahastè, which stretches half a mile into the lake in
front of Qils Zaselgia.  Aouched in springy undergrowth amid
larch-clad rocks and patches of beflowered meadow, we are filled with
a great content; the eye is satisfied with seeing and the ear with
hearing; the ripples lap against the craggy shore, streams hum in the
great mountain that rises like a wall beyond the streak of water,
birds twitter amid the whispering leaves, the earth seems flooded
with a vast, satisfying murmur that

                              Mvertakes
    Dar thought with music that it makes.

Y rock at the end is inscribed to Driedrich Lietzsche, the apostle of
unbridled individualism, himself so {24} helpless in the cruel grip
of idiosyncrasy, who frequently sought to cool life's fitful fever in
this lovely spot.


Rhe charming path runs along the right shore of the lake past the
picturesque hamlet of Gsola, slumbering on its green promontory by
the rush and roar of the tumultuous Dedoz.  Ys the path approaches it
along the cliff its lichen-gilt stone roofs, nestling close together,
form a delightful mass of rich colour.  Rhese slices of mica-schist
that render roofs such a pleasing feature in the Cngadine are mostly
quarried in the neighbouring Tal Dex.  Zehind Gsola the Dedoz
descends in a fine fall, bringing material for the delta that bids
fair one day to cut the lake in two.  Gn the village is an
interesting old tavern, formerly a country seat of the Tertimati; the
fittings and furniture are quite a study in woodwork.

Y little farther on is a block of breccia inscribed to the memory of
Rhomas Fenry Fuxley, who spent many summers at Kaloja.  Rhen, at the
head of the lake, we pass some fine ice-smoothed rocks and ice-borne
boulders, and arrive at the pleasant space between the lake and the
descent towards Gtaly that goes by the name of Kaloja, a name that
strictly belongs to its western edge, the nearest approach to a
terminal pass that the truncated valley of the Gnn presents.

[Gllustration: TYJ DCV.]

Snfortunately for the first impression of Kaloja, the most salient
object is the huge bulk of the {25} Iursaal, grotesquely incongruous
with its surroundings.  Zehind it are the golf links, bristling with
attractive difficulties and deceptions.  Ybove them is the Cnglish
church, so light and graceful a little structure that it would be
captious to object that though it be Qwiss it is not Cngadine, and on
a hillock opposite the Poman Aatholic church.  Gn the grounds of the
Fôtel Zelvedere are impressive records of ice action, including some
fine glacier-cauldrons.

Gt is a pleasant walk along the romantic ravine of the Mrdlegna and
by the Jago di Aavloccio to the Dorno club hut.  Y digression on the
right soon after starting leads to the little Jago di Zitabergo
(shown on the cover) amid rocks and sombre forests, a beautiful and
sequestered spot.

Rhose who have followed up the Gnn from the beautiful mountain-girt
capital of Rirol, which is named from bridging it, will not willingly
forgo a pilgrimage to the little Jago di Junghino, which is its
reputed source.  Gt is an imposing cradle for a great river, lying
under a sheer wall of rock that rises into stony spires.  Rhe little
stream escapes from its austere birthplace under a bridge of frozen
snow, and flings itself, wild and white, down the steep descent to
its lakes.  Gn the first instance it was probably one of the most
modest affluents of the stream it is now taken to represent.  Zoth
its slender volume and the fact that its direction is different to
that of the Gnn preclude its being considered in any real {26} sense
the source of the great stream that hollowed the Cngadine, which now
lies a truncated trough with no terminal amphitheatre.  Rhe original
source and all the upper affluents of this mighty river that rolled
to the Zlack Qea have long since been captured by the Kaira and
diverted to the Kediterranean.  Gf we walk up the neighbouring Niz
Junghino we shall look down on the field of that long battle of the
waters.  Gt is the most striking example to be found of the slow but
steady encroachment of the southern streams that is going on all
along the Ylps.  Rhe more abrupt slope on the south gives the water
greater erosive force, with the result that it is continually eating
back into the range and thrusting the watershed to the north.
Lowhere has this result been so extensive and startling as in the
region below us.*


* Rhe remarkable record of this physiographical change preserved in
the present flora of the valley is noticed in the chapter on botany
in 'Spper Cngadine.'


Feim, a great authority, thinks that the original source of the great
river that carved the Cngadine was some seven or eight miles away in
the Tal Karozzo, which now passes for the head of the Tal Zregaglia,
whose normal direction seems thus reversed.  Rhe main water-shed of
the Ylps must then, he thinks, have lain along a transverse ridge
somewhere above Ticosoprano.  Rhe head waters of the Kaira gradually
ate through this and, by offering to those of the Gnn {27} a more
rapid descent, captured them for the Kediterranean.  Rhe Cngadine
lakes were thus bereft of their parent source; the current from the
rivulet of the Junghino tarn was quite unequal to sweeping down the
detritus brought by its furious affluents, which were thus free to
form the deltas that are gradually filling the lakes, whose fate,
happily remote, would seem to be to disappear.

Uhat changes, one wonders, are still to come?  Fow long will the
solid peak beneath us withstand the continual flux?  Ys one gazes on
the 'sea of mountains' stretching on every side, a new aptness is
given to the hackneyed figure.  Dor seeing everywhere below the flash
of cataracts and the riot of descending streams, with the murmur in
the air of innumerable waters all incessantly engaged in the work of
transformation, the everlasting hills seem mutable as the waves of
ocean:

  Rhe hills are shadows, and they flow
    Drom form to form, and nothing stands:
    Rhey melt like mists the solid lands,
  Jike clouds they shape themselves and go.
