Title: Beautiful Europe--The Engadine

Author: Spencer Musson

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70594]

Language: English

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEAUTIFUL EUROPE--THE
ENGADINE ***


CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I. THE LAKE DISTRICT

II. VAL BERNINA

III. SUOT FONTANA MERLA

IV. THE LOWER ENGADINE

V. THE NATIONAL PARK

VI. WINTER

INDEX


I

THE LAKE DISTRICT

'Ille terrarum mihi præter omnes angulus ridet' is the inscription
that greets the traveller over the post-stables at Silvaplana.  He
is, perhaps, a little surprised, not having hitherto thought of
stables and the postal service as haunts of classic culture; but
those who know the Upper Engadine will readily accept the quotation
as expressing their feeling towards it.  There is something about
that high-lying, broad-stretched valley, though its scenery is seldom
of a dramatic, overmastering kind, that gives it a quite individual
claim when Memory makes up her jewels.

There is an individual note, too, about the people, a suggestion of
peculiar history that mocks us as we try to seize it.  One of the
earliest documents in a people's archives is ordinarily their
language, but that spoken by Engadiners, the interesting form of
Romanic known as Ladin, one of the many tongues evolved from late
Latin, only takes us back to the Roman {10} conquest of the Rhaetian
upland that won the magniloquent admiration of Horace.  In truth, the
population is a human document, a palimpsest on which the Romans are
but the latest and most masterful writers.  Since, at the
commencement of our era, the soldiers of Drusus and Tiberius wrote
their enduring record, there have been only interlineations, mainly
Teutonic, but many are the traces of antecedent scripts.  Could we
read below the prevailing Latin, we should probably find an elusive
Keltic romance and enwoven with it perhaps a grave Etruscan legend,
while scattered through all are undecipherable memorials of forgotten
races and perished tongues.  One ethnic wave after another has surged
up that ancient highway from central Europe into Italy, and each as
it passed or receded has contributed some component to the population.

But even the briefest sketch of the tangled history of the Engadine
is beyond the scope of this booklet.  I will stick to my little last,
the graceless business of cutting away four out of every five pages
of a previous work which the world has willingly let die.*


* This little book is mainly an abridgment of 'The Upper Engadine'
(A. and C. Black, 1906).


Most travellers enter the Engadine by the tunnel under the Albula,
having slowly wound up from Chur along a line that can hardly be
surpassed in bold engineering and romantic variety.  After a
momentary {11} halt at Spinas, we steam for a couple of miles down
Val Bevers--very interesting to the geologist and botanist, the
singular mixture of Alpine and meadow flora can be noted even from
the rail--and reach the valley of the Inn at Bevers, where are some
excellent specimens of the quaint old Engadine houses that have no
small part in giving the valley its individual character.  Away on
the east stands Piz Esan, a bold, bare, dolomitic mass capped with
Rhaetic, which is the south-western sentinel of the lately
established National Park.

The rail turns right and left.  Let us turn right to Samaden,
administratively the chief village of the Upper Engadine.  Here, too,
are good examples of old Engadine architecture, including a house of
the Plantas, one of the ancient families of the valley whose name is
writ large on every page of its history.  St. Peter's at Samaden
enjoys a traditional primacy among the churches of the valley, and
has many representative functions.  It bears the date 1491, but this
must refer to the rebuilding of the nave; the Romanesque tower must
date from the tenth or eleventh century.  Switzerland has old
churches in plenty, but both care and neglect have combined to denude
them of nearly all the interesting features that the belfries show
they must have possessed.  Protestantism is often blamed for this,
but in artistic desert I do not know that there is much to choose
between the two communions; such difference as there may be {12} is
expressed in two different estimates of George IV.  Someone remarked
that he had no taste.  'On the contrary,' said another, 'he's a great
deal of taste, but it's bad.'

Piz Ot, near Samaden, is a superb point of view; the neighbouring Piz
Padella is interesting botanically and geologically.

A mile beyond Samaden are Celerina and Cresta, now merged into one.
Plate II. is a view on the way: in the background Piz Albriz, on the
right a buttress of the sombre Piz Chalchaign, Pontresina in middle
distance; nearer, standing lorn among the tombs on a little
larch-clad hill, the ancient church of San Gian, which, except for
funerals, is now disused; in the meadowed floor of the valley the Inn
rests in quiet reaches after its furious descent from the lakes; its
clear waters are joined by those of the Flaz from Val Bernina, turbid
with 'the dust of continents to be,' and larger in volume than those
of the stream in which after their confluence its name and
individuality are lost; in the triangle between the rivers are the
Samaden golf links.  The most famous and fatal of toboggan runs
descends between St. Moritz and Cresta.

Between Celerina and St. Moritz the rail threads the romantic
Charnadura gorge above the raging Inn.  At the upper end is a fine
fall by which the water descends from the lake of St. Moritz, the
lowest of the chain of blue-green lakes that form {13} the
characteristic charm of the upper reaches of the Engadine.

St. Moritz strikes one on arrival as a town of hotels.  Happily,
hotels are becoming sensible that they cannot afford to be unsightly
outrages on the scenery that is their _raison d'être_.  An example of
this is the Hôtel Margna, designed by Signur Nichol Hartmann, in whom
the Engadine possesses an architect imbued with the spirit of its
characteristic and picturesque style of building, and with unfailing
resource in adapting it to modern requirements and utilizing old
construction.  'Only a matter of appearance,' said a practical
companion when I was hesitating to enter a restaurant that disfigured
a lovely nook of tarn and fell.  It was said with a superior air of
appealing to higher considerations, much as Solomon, in extolling the
God-fearing woman, reminds us that favour is deceitful and beauty is
vain.  But, after all, what is scenery save a matter of appearance?
In fact, Switzerland lives on appearances, and it is but business to
take them into account in catering for the thousands who are
attracted thither, not by the sterling virtues of the inhabitants,
but by the superficial beauty of the land.

St. Moritz, seated on a spur of hill at the head of the lake, is the
highest village in the Engadine, being some 200 feet higher than the
Maloja Pass at the head of the valley.  At the highest point is the
old church, no longer used, whose interesting belfry seems {14}
leaning to its fall.  The inestimable Swiss periodical _Heimatschutz_
has pointed a salutary architectural moral by presenting this
neglected tower with its simple proportions and vestiges of good work
side by side with the modern parish church, a painstaking example of
bad taste.

Beyond the old church the hill slopes up to the Badrutt Park, named
after a famous dynasty of hoteliers.  Here is provision for golf,
abounding in speculative and absorbing contingencies.  In the larch
wood on the upper road from St. Moritz to Camfer is the Segantini
Museum, in which are gradually being collected works of the painter
who loved and studied the Engadine with life-long devotion.

In the way of pictures, St. Moritz possesses a treasure of the last
kind one would look to find in a mountain village.  In the Palace
Hotel is--what shall I say?--a copy, a replica, the original, for
even that claim has been made for it, of Raphael's Madonna di S.
Sisto, assuredly the noblest presentment of motherhood that the world
can show.  By a happy inspiration it has been placed in the Ladies'
Room, where it must awaken a _Magnificat_ in many a heart.

Apart from technique, there are slight but unmistakable differences
between it and its famous compeer at Dresden.  In the Madonna's gaze
is less of wonder and amazement, something reaching far into
futurity, assurance of final triumph and disdain of intermediate
obstacle; not yet had the sword that should go through {15} her soul
set its sign on the young mother's face.  In the Child the difference
is in an opposite sense; in both pictures there is the same wonderful
suggestion of the awakening of the divine spirit amid the strange
limitations of humanity, but here it is rather the human pathos than
the divine power that holds our attention; there is less imperial
moulding of brow and mouth, less profound mastery in the eyes: the
eyes to which all things were open but which saw them now as man
sees, appear contemplating with perplexed wonder the path that was to
be trodden--he had known it all along, but it looked so different now.


In the flat land at the head of the lake, a little more than a mile
from St. Moritz, and linked to it by an electric tramway, are the
famous chalybeate springs, round which has grown up the cluster of
buildings known as St. Moritzbad.  About half-way down, on the
larch-clad slope that rises to the right of the road, is the Museum
Engiadinais, the charming building in old Engadine styles in which
Signur Hartmann has housed the magnificent collection of Rhaetian
antiquities made by Signur Campell of Celerina.  To speak of this
museum as a collection of antiquities gives a very inadequate notion
of its interior.  Whole rooms, halls and corridors have been
installed there, and, combined with the old styles of the building
and the furniture and surroundings of {16} old life, make wandering
about it like an excursion into the past.

A little farther on is the Anglican church, a massive little building
in the grey-green gabbro of the neighbourhood.  The tower seems to
have been suggested by that of the half-ruined church of San Gian, an
assimilation of local style that cannot be too highly commended.  An
English church on the Continent, like the Englishman himself, his
clubs, customs, and amusements, is apt to have an air of
extraterritoriality.  Who has not felt a shock on revisiting some
beloved mountain haunt to find that since he was last there the
church of his fathers, looking as though it had just stepped from a
suburb of London, had added its note of incongruity to those that
hotels and bazaars had accumulated on the devoted spot?

The chalybeate waters of St. Moritz have been known from early times.
In addition to the original spring there are now two others, one of
which wells up in the bed of the Inn.  Bubbles of carbonic acid gas
that rise to the surface of the lake where the river enters it are
thought to indicate another spring below; in fact, the whole mass of
crystalline rock that rises into the peaks of Rosatz and Ova Cotschna
is probably a vast laboratory, in which the water that falls from
heaven and filters down to the river and the lake is charged with
healing virtues.

[Illustration: PIZ ALBANA AND PIZ JULIER IN WINTER.]

Its efficacy, no doubt, is largely due to the {17} co-operation of
the air, and to the ample provision made for the comfort and
distraction of health-seekers.  Sportsmen, artists, naturalists, and
whatnot find wherewithal to occupy them, while those who wish to
lounge and dream, who are content for a while simply to exist, have
environment to their hearts' content: sleeping lakes and leaping
streams, slopes of pasture starred with flowers, solemn sanctuaries
of forest, wildernesses filled with the large companionable
loneliness of the hills.  And all this enchantment shines in the rare
mountain air with a vividness that seems scarcely real.  Indeed, it
is hard to set limits to the many and magical effects of altitude on
body and spirit.  Though there may be no theological ground for the
statement by which it is said encouragement is sometimes given to
invalids at St. Moritz that in the worst event they are nearer heaven
than in any other health resort of Europe; yet, short of that
unnegotiable contingency, there are undoubted advantages at 6,000
feet above the sea not to be found at lower levels.


Two roads, one from the village and one from the baths, and numerous
paths, direct and digressive, lead from St. Moritz to Camfer,
standing on the uppermost of the three rocky steps that divide the
Upper Engadine into as many lake-basins.  The upper lake has been
divided into three by detritus brought down from the Val Fex at Sils
and from the Julier {18} and Surlej at Silvaplana, the mid-lake at St
Moritz has shrunk to a remnant of its former self, while the lower
lake has entirely disappeared, tapped by the gorge that the Inn has
cut from the Upper to the Lower Engadine.

The origin of such lakes has long been a problem.  The most
authoritative conclusion seems to be that in the slow tectonic
wrinkling of the earth's crust bars have been raised across the
course of a river, which has thus been dammed up into a lake and
drowned its former bed.  Of course, a crustal subsidence might have
had the same effect, or the two movements may have been combined.

A mile and a half beyond Camfer is Silvaplana, seated on the green
promontory by which the silt of the Ova del Vallun descending from
the Julier Pass, seconded on the opposite side by streams from the
Surlej, has cut the original lake in two.  A picturesque wooden
bridge spans the channel still left to the Inn between the deltas of
its furious tributaries; in the background rises Piz Margna, a
glacier filling the cleft in its broad head.

The sylvan shades commemorated in the name of Silvaplana have long
given place to flowery meadows, which now cover the broad holm that
the Ova del Vallun has thrust into the lake.  High above the village
the vehement stream is commandeered for the electrical supply of the
valley.  By the side of the {19} works is a water-wheel, the earliest
and the latest harnessing of water-power, a striking illustration of
the return of industry to its oldest helpmate.  It will be a curious
instance of history repeating itself if manufactures again plant
themselves by streams as in the days before water-wheels were
superseded by steam.  Population may one day be as congested in the
beautiful highlands that are now the playground of the nations as in
the great coal-basins.  Happily the 'white coal,' as the Swiss call
their water-power, deals more sympathetically with nature than the
black.  What a contrast to our factories and gasworks is this trim
little building at Silvaplana, with its aqueduct of ruddy larch, and
the fine cascade from the overflow of its reservoir.  It is as though
the grimy palm of Vulcan were replaced by the light finger of Apollo.

The _raison d'être_ of Silvaplana was the Julier Pass.  Before the
construction of the railway, this was a frequent route for entering
the Engadine, which makes a much more striking first impression here
than from the Albula.  After emerging from the grey desolation of the
two upper reaches of the descent, a superb view of the Bernina peaks
and the ice-fields is gradually disclosed.  More and more the
panorama is extended to the right, first by the Fex peaks and
glaciers, and finally by the massive Margna.  The one thing lacking
is the Engadine; we seem to have arrived in a land of serried and
far-spread mountains, {20} in which there is no place for the valley
of the Inn.  So precipitous are its sides at this point that no
suggestion is given of the broad lake-filled chasm intervening
between the immediate foreground and the sombre rampart that rises to
those glistening fields and summits.  At length we are among the
first outposts of the forest, gaunt pines and battered larch,
scourged by centuries of storm; suddenly we see through the foliage
the glint of water and of verdure; a moment after, and the lovely
valley from Sils to St. Moritz, with lakes and forests, meadows and
clustered homes, is stretched before us.

It is a pleasant walk from Silvaplana to the pass, a broad saddle of
bog and pasture, flecked with snow, seamed with rivulets, and bright
with abundant flora.  The tarns on the left are stocked with trout in
spite of being sealed with ice and buried in snow for half the year.
A path from the dairy of the Julier Alp takes us in three hours to
the summit of the Piz Julier, where, 'walled by wide air and roofed
by boundless heaven,' we have an extensive and splendid view.

Another delightful walk from Silvaplana, as from most places in the
Upper Engadine, is to the Fuorcla Surlej.  This saddle between Piz
Corvatsch and Munt Arias is equally accessible from Silvaplana, Sils,
St. Moritz, and Pontresina; it thus affords a pleasant way of going
from any place in the main valley to the Bernina side-valley.

{21}

The road up the valley from Silvaplana lies straitly between the left
shore of the lake and the mountains that rise precipitously from it.
Walkers will do well, after Camfer, to take the path that skirts the
lakes on the right side of the valley, every step of which is
beautiful.  It leads now under shady trees, now over parklike or
rock-strewn slopes; picks its way along precipitous hillsides, amid
many-hued crags, set with steadfast-rooted pine and larch, festooned
with red roses, inlaid with dwarf rhododendron, blue clematis, and
countless lovely flowers; occasionally may be found masses of the
rare and stately Alpine columbine.  On the right are the
ever-changing waters of the lakes, or the flat, emblossomed meadows
that separate them.

Not quite three miles from Silvaplana the high-road passes the little
hamlet of Sils Baselgia, so called from the ancient church, the
basilica of the neighbourhood, that stands, 'a grief-worn memory of
old years,' in a flat meadow by the tranquil Inn.

Past and present are delightfully merged in Signur Badrutt's Hôtel
Margna on the right of the hamlet, an admirable example of an hotel
in the traditional architecture of the region, and in harmony with
the scenery around it.  Nichol Hartmann was given a free hand with a
characteristically massive and picturesque old Engadine house, which
he restored, enlarged, and fitted with every modern comfort and
convenience, but with unfailing antiquarian feeling; old features
have been piously preserved, and their spirit carried {22} into the
new construction, with infinite ingenuity and down to the smallest
detail.

About half an hour farther from the high-road, Sils Maria nestles
cosily in a recess of the valley behind a rocky hill, which rises as
an island from the flat meadows that have supplanted the lake.

Val Fex, which stretches up some five miles to the south-east, is
perhaps the most beautiful of the side-valleys of the Engadine.  From
the sunny breakfast-cloisters of the Hôtel Margna we see its
widespread glacier sagging between the Capütschin and Piz Led, as it
were a great white sheet let down from heaven.  This forms the
background of Plate IV., with the picturesque little chapel that
stands on the steep meadow slope between the first and second reaches
of the valley in the foreground.  On either side of the glacier
interesting passes lead to Chiesa in the beautiful Val Malenco, and
thence down to Sondrio, the capital of the Valtelline; in a few hours
we exchange ice-bound heights, sombre pines, and cautious,
close-growing Alpine flora for umbrageous groves, trellised vines,
and the luxurious breezes of the south.

Various points in the great rocky down that separates the Fex and
Fedoz valleys afford fine views.  We look down the whole chain of the
lakes, seeming masses of turquoise in an emerald setting; on the
right the Val Fex mounts to its glacier with crowded peaks beyond; on
the left is the wild ravine of the Fedoz, the billowy ice-field at
its head descending in {23} a crumpled and crevassed glacier, beyond
which a host of rocky peaks ring round the abyss of blue haze that
covers the steep descent into Italy.

On the opposite side of the Val Fex is Marmorè, another fine point of
view.  An interesting continuation of this walk leads to the savage
amphitheatre round the little Lej Sgrischus, 'the shuddering lake.'
This lonely tarn, 8,695 feet above the sea, frozen for nine months of
the year, abounds in trout, a striking instance of the hardiness of
these redoubtable little fish.  How they came there is a problem; if
introduced by human enterprise it must have been centuries ago as the
renting of the fish-take is of ancient date.

A delightful place in which to pass a lazy hour or so is the narrow
promontory of Chastè, which stretches half a mile into the lake in
front of Sils Baselgia.  Couched in springy undergrowth amid
larch-clad rocks and patches of beflowered meadow, we are filled with
a great content; the eye is satisfied with seeing and the ear with
hearing; the ripples lap against the craggy shore, streams hum in the
great mountain that rises like a wall beyond the streak of water,
birds twitter amid the whispering leaves, the earth seems flooded
with a vast, satisfying murmur that

                              Overtakes
    Far thought with music that it makes.

A rock at the end is inscribed to Friedrich Nietzsche, the apostle of
unbridled individualism, himself so {24} helpless in the cruel grip
of idiosyncrasy, who frequently sought to cool life's fitful fever in
this lovely spot.


The charming path runs along the right shore of the lake past the
picturesque hamlet of Isola, slumbering on its green promontory by
the rush and roar of the tumultuous Fedoz.  As the path approaches it
along the cliff its lichen-gilt stone roofs, nestling close together,
form a delightful mass of rich colour.  These slices of mica-schist
that render roofs such a pleasing feature in the Engadine are mostly
quarried in the neighbouring Val Fex.  Behind Isola the Fedoz
descends in a fine fall, bringing material for the delta that bids
fair one day to cut the lake in two.  In the village is an
interesting old tavern, formerly a country seat of the Vertimati; the
fittings and furniture are quite a study in woodwork.

A little farther on is a block of breccia inscribed to the memory of
Thomas Henry Huxley, who spent many summers at Maloja.  Then, at the
head of the lake, we pass some fine ice-smoothed rocks and ice-borne
boulders, and arrive at the pleasant space between the lake and the
descent towards Italy that goes by the name of Maloja, a name that
strictly belongs to its western edge, the nearest approach to a
terminal pass that the truncated valley of the Inn presents.

[Illustration: VAL FEX.]

Unfortunately for the first impression of Maloja, the most salient
object is the huge bulk of the {25} Kursaal, grotesquely incongruous
with its surroundings.  Behind it are the golf links, bristling with
attractive difficulties and deceptions.  Above them is the English
church, so light and graceful a little structure that it would be
captious to object that though it be Swiss it is not Engadine, and on
a hillock opposite the Roman Catholic church.  In the grounds of the
Hôtel Belvedere are impressive records of ice action, including some
fine glacier-cauldrons.

It is a pleasant walk along the romantic ravine of the Ordlegna and
by the Lago di Cavloccio to the Forno club hut.  A digression on the
right soon after starting leads to the little Lago di Bitabergo
(shown on the cover) amid rocks and sombre forests, a beautiful and
sequestered spot.

Those who have followed up the Inn from the beautiful mountain-girt
capital of Tirol, which is named from bridging it, will not willingly
forgo a pilgrimage to the little Lago di Lunghino, which is its
reputed source.  It is an imposing cradle for a great river, lying
under a sheer wall of rock that rises into stony spires.  The little
stream escapes from its austere birthplace under a bridge of frozen
snow, and flings itself, wild and white, down the steep descent to
its lakes.  In the first instance it was probably one of the most
modest affluents of the stream it is now taken to represent.  Both
its slender volume and the fact that its direction is different to
that of the Inn preclude its being considered in any real {26} sense
the source of the great stream that hollowed the Engadine, which now
lies a truncated trough with no terminal amphitheatre.  The original
source and all the upper affluents of this mighty river that rolled
to the Black Sea have long since been captured by the Maira and
diverted to the Mediterranean.  If we walk up the neighbouring Piz
Lunghino we shall look down on the field of that long battle of the
waters.  It is the most striking example to be found of the slow but
steady encroachment of the southern streams that is going on all
along the Alps.  The more abrupt slope on the south gives the water
greater erosive force, with the result that it is continually eating
back into the range and thrusting the watershed to the north.
Nowhere has this result been so extensive and startling as in the
region below us.*


* The remarkable record of this physiographical change preserved in
the present flora of the valley is noticed in the chapter on botany
in 'Upper Engadine.'


Heim, a great authority, thinks that the original source of the great
river that carved the Engadine was some seven or eight miles away in
the Val Marozzo, which now passes for the head of the Val Bregaglia,
whose normal direction seems thus reversed.  The main water-shed of
the Alps must then, he thinks, have lain along a transverse ridge
somewhere above Vicosoprano.  The head waters of the Maira gradually
ate through this and, by offering to those of the Inn {27} a more
rapid descent, captured them for the Mediterranean.  The Engadine
lakes were thus bereft of their parent source; the current from the
rivulet of the Lunghino tarn was quite unequal to sweeping down the
detritus brought by its furious affluents, which were thus free to
form the deltas that are gradually filling the lakes, whose fate,
happily remote, would seem to be to disappear.

What changes, one wonders, are still to come?  How long will the
solid peak beneath us withstand the continual flux?  As one gazes on
the 'sea of mountains' stretching on every side, a new aptness is
given to the hackneyed figure.  For seeing everywhere below the flash
of cataracts and the riot of descending streams, with the murmur in
the air of innumerable waters all incessantly engaged in the work of
transformation, the everlasting hills seem mutable as the waves of
ocean:

  The hills are shadows, and they flow
    From form to form, and nothing stands:
    They melt like mists the solid lands,
  Like clouds they shape themselves and go.
